---
published: false
---

<It gives me great pleasure to introduce myself as the newest member of the ChemBioHub team! As the new starter, it seems appropriate to tell you a little about myself, what my role in the team is and what I hope to be able to do for you.>

<My educational background focused on biology and toxicology, which invariably led me to my PhD project at the University of East Anglia. My project utilised the animal model Xenopus laevis as a phenotypic screening tool to identify compounds with therapeutic potential towards the treatment of melanoma. Having completed my PhD (and brief postdoctoral stint), joining the ChemBioHub team was a logical step for me. My experience in small molecule chemical biology and phenotypic compound screening allowed me to see the value of such a project and enables me to better understand the data management challenges scientists regularly face.>

<**## My role as ChemBioHub Project Scientist**>

<The true goal of my position as ChemBioHub Project Scientist is to relate the real world data management problems faced by bench scientists to our project developers, to ensure the ChemBioHub remains as useful and relevant as possible to the people who use it most. In other words, my primary role is to help you get the most out of your ChemBioHub. This includes introducing you to the ChemBioHub system, demonstrating key aspects of compound registration and retrieval, and presenting the value of our data analysis tools such as ChemBioCrunch. Looking towards the future however, I want to know how we can help you manage your data problems. We aim to make laborious, time-consuming data analysis a thing of the past, so that you can start acting on your results rather than waiting on them. For hours during my PhD and post doc I found myself tediously cutting and pasting plate reader data from one clumsily made excel spreadsheet to another. This process was slow and prone to human error. ChemBioCrunch is a superb example of how we can turn your data processing chores into reliable, rapidly analysed information (as demonstrated below).>

'''CHEMBIOCRUNCH SLIDES (The same four that are on the main site, is this possible? I thought it would be better then typing it out?)'''

<Our excellent development team is equipped to provide a quick turn around, and tools such as ChemBioCrunch could have a significant benefit towards your project. The only issue is you may have to find some other way of being productive on your tea break.>  

<Despite being in its first year, I am very impressed with the ChemBioHub’s high level of quality in both its design and implementation. A lot of care and attention has been made to ensure the ChemBioHub system addresses real research demands, but is also incredibly intuitive and easy to use (as discussed by [Paul](https://chembiohub.ox.ac.uk/blog/2014/10/02/UX-in-scientific-software.html)). Over the next year we hope to continue to develop our project into a utility that can be used by all chemical biologists to store, analyse and compare their data in a secure environment that will promote collaboration and research throughout the University of Oxford.>

<## **Get in touch**>

<If you think your project could benefit from our data management tools (whether they exist yet or need to be created) or just want to find out more about the ChemBioHub project, get in touch with me at adam.hendry@chembiohub.ac.uk. I’m happy to discuss any research or data management challenges you may have, and may well be able to provide a swift solution.>

'''Is there a hyper link that would take my email address to outlook or something similar?'''
'''Should sub-headings be h2 + in bold? This may need changing'''



